Because I think he speaks to you a lot of things.
Well, I'm curious now, when you talk about cultural development, what do you do?
Okay.
We have... What do you mean, saying cultural development?
We mean, essentially, for the public, three things.
First, exhibitions.
Second, publications.
Third, manifestation, I mean conference, collocs and concerts.
We intend to, through exhibition, to show a larger public the collections, because our collections are precious and are hidden.
They are hidden in the library.
They are for the researchers, not for the open public.
The exhibition gives us the occasion to show a larger public the wealthiness of our collection.
It's like the...
It's in a way the perpetuation of the mission of the Enlightenment, because when the French Revolution took place in France, the revolutionaries told, let's give to the people the chance to see the operas of the national genius.
We do the same in a way.
to get out the crypt, like grotte, the crypt, you know?
To get out, there's things closed, locked.
I can't speak French.
No.
No, because I... Your English is better than me.
Your English is perfect.
Your English is wonderful.
I can understand a little bit French, but I prefer your English, which is much better for us.
Merci.
The first exhibition is to make visible
things which are usually invisible for a large public, like treasures in ancient cathedrals, you know, crypton treasures, like in the royal palace, the private collection after the revolution have been back
to the people.
But that's a general purpose.
But our purpose is to, through exhibition, to say something to the public about the library.
Our national library is encyclopedic.
Therefore, the collection of
of such a library are dispatched in books, manuscripts, images, stamps, costumes, decor of opera and theatre.
Many objects, very different.
Through exhibition, we say to the public, see how different are the objects
we gather and collect.
First.
And second is to say to the public, a library, a national library like us, is a certain view about the knowledge today.
It's a certain image of the knowledge today.
It's an encyclopedia in a way of organizing the different knowledge
one respecting the others.
For example, here we have four, maybe Frédéric told you, four fields are on literature, philosophy and history, legal and politics, and science and techniques.
Our encyclopedia is organized around four fields.
That's four fields.
Through exhibition, we intend to make visible a certain vision of the knowledge.
You used the word encyclopedia in a very interesting way.
How do you use the word encyclopedia?
Encyclopedia means first to have a lot of entire... how do this... It's to organize knowledge and to gather things very different.
Encyclopedia... the dream of the totality of things.
And the other dream is the dream of organizing all this totality.
Organizing the totality.
It's not a superficial collection.
It's a very detailed, deep, and very spread up.
Sweeping, widespread.
Comprehensive.
We are comprehensive and extensive to organize this horizontality.
I've never seen the word encyclopedic years before with
with regard to a national library policy.
So it is very interesting.
Because when you do an encyclopedia, like Diderot and d'Alembert in 1918, you try to gather a certain amount of knowledge of the time to organize through
things or through an absence of order like alphabetical order.
We, with this partition, in four partition, we try to organize this.
The library could be conceived, perceived like an encyclopedia.
It is a big encyclopedia where you walk through the space like walking through the pages.
When you think of the design of this building,
It is walking through a book, isn't it?
Well, yeah, they said that, for example, the four things at the library command few rooms, like chapters of the knowledge, both from chapter to chapter to chapter.
That's good.
That's nice.
Does this represent a change in national policy?
Would you say this has always been the policy of the French government, to have an encyclopedic library which you're quite aggressively trying to go out and invite the general population to participate?
I don't think it's always been that case.
No.
We have been always, for four centuries,
encyclopedia for the collections, but we, if you, encyclopedia is to gather, to organize, and to give the people, to give the public.
You know?
Three, gather, organize the knowledge, and give the public.
Up till now, we cover, we organize, and some of the public could have access of this encyclopedia.
With exhibitions, we intend to emphasize the access of these encyclopedic collections.
Can you talk about...
We're moving now towards a united Europe in terms of the countries will be closer, currency, trade.
How important is it, while all this is going on, to maintain, and how does the French library work to really retain the identity and the character of the French character, the French identity?
Does the library work to do that?
To maintain a sense of your national heritage?
while you are moving at the same time towards a united Europe in a political and a... Ah, okay, okay.
Yes.
It's a general philosophical question.
The more we go towards Europe, the more you maintain and confirm and affirm the national heritage.
For example, for numerization, digitalization.
Many plans, but Yannick Meunier maybe could speak about it, but tomorrow morning Jacqueline Sanson could speak about it, but the... Excuse me.
Back on.
You're talking about the more Europe becomes the same economically,
the more important it is that you retain your individual identity.
And you said that this is part of the expression of that.
Yes.
For example, I'm not quite sure
This question could be asked to Jacqueline Sanson, because she's more engaged in this process.
Okay.
The books, when we were at the British Library in March, they are now moving 10,000 books a day over to the British Library.
When do you start your... Oh, yes.
Excuse me, but Jacqueline Samson is... She's the person.
It is a person specialized, because she's the director of the 12 millions of books, and she organized the animation of the movie.
Excuse me, I'm not so... I'm not competent.
She's the one.
Because the other fields are covered by other people, I don't want to speak about this.
We organize our exhibition by a typology of exhibitions.
First is encyclopedic exhibitions, where we try to show
the widespread collections, in the sense I told you.
Second is an exhibition more educational.
We intend to do a
A five long court exhibition, I mean five years of exhibition about the L'écrit.
L'écrit.
Where?
The written?
Yeah, L'écrit.
L'écrit, the written.
L'écrit is writing manuscripts.
Yes, about the written.
That's what I thought you were saying.
The forms of the written things.
We have, therefore, five years of exhibition.
The first will deal with the system of writings.
Mesopotamia, Egypt, etc.
The second would be about the page.
Manuscripts are typed or printed.
The third would be about the support of the writings, the paper, or plastic, or numeric, or all of the things.
Fourth would be, we are not quite sure of the fourth, but the .
Right as well?
O-U-T-I-L.
Like pen, pen on... Instruments.
Instruments.
Learning instruments.
Pens, pencils.
Yes.
Extraordinary.
This is a big exhibition first.
We begin this year with a big exhibition about encyclopedism.
Next year will be about the earth on the sky.
The third will be about the utopia.
Ah.
Okay.
So the environment, I guess, is the other one you're talking about.
The earth and the sky is like... About maps.
Yes, cartography.
It's an image of the earth, image of the sky.
And all wonderful things drawn from your own collections.
Yes.
Now, when you have the exhibitions here, will you bring manuscripts from Richelieu out here?
Yes, yes.
You bring them out here for the exhibition?
Yes, and we do exhibitions together with Richelieu and Tolgec for this big, for example, earth on the sky,
Earth will be there, sky will be here.
Utopia will be with the New York Public Library.
Oh, with Monsieur Leclerc.
Yes.
I am in charge of the Utopia of the 20th century.
Will you be coming to New York?
Yes.
Oh, I'll come see you.
Oh, thank you.
Thank you very much.
You'll have to tell me when you're in New York.
Yes, in autumn.
That's okay.
I will call you.
I've been to New York often.
Oh yeah?
Yes, I'm only three hours from New York.
Anyway, that's it.
Therefore, first big exhibition, encyclopedic exhibition, second educational exhibition.
I'm sorry, it's more monographic and more...
monographic exhibition for about one formed, one collection inside our collections.
This is the first typology.
For the collocs on conference, we organize things about, first, reflection about the writing on the library, the history of library.
Second is,
about geopolitical problems of the contemporary world.
For example, we made a cycle of conference, a series of conference, about the crisis of democracy.
In autumn, we will deal with the future of China.
And next year we will deal with ecology.
It's more political problems.
Third thing is lectures.
We do lectures.
I mean readings.
It's readings.
Not lecture, reading.
Now, for the exhibitions, do you develop the ideas for these, or do you talk to your librarians?
Who comes up with the ideas for the materials?
Together.
And could you tell us a little bit about your own background?
Are you a librarian?
No, I made a school, a high school here.
I don't know if you know, it's École Normale Supérieure.
It doesn't give you any idea.
It's high school.
I mean, it's... I can't explain.
I'm just curious about your... I'm specialized in antiques.
Ah, antiquities.
Antiquities.
Greek, Latin.
Oh, really?
So you've been brought into a book environment, though.
Your background is antiquities.
University, yes.
I taught in university Greek and Latin.
And French literature.
I see.
And I'm just curious how you came to work in a library, though, working with the... Because I was interested to spread my things onto...
be involved in things which are a little bit different, you know.
It's difficult in English, actually.
No, it's not good, but, well.
No, it's wonderful.
And I'll talk to you before we, you know, when I write this.
If there are any problems with the quotations, I'll call you and we'll go over some of the things.
Yes, yes, please, because, oh, don't quote me.
Well, it's not good, but, well...
It's perfect.
But, you know, I'll go over your quotes with you, so you can be happy with them.
Yeah.
So you can be happy with them.
This is your thing?
No, just everything, all the information has been extraordinary.
That's perfect.
So... I think that the best people, I mean, to have the VID is here for the Richelieu.
Here for, those are the two heads.
One for the Richelieu, one for Tolbiac.
Now this is, you can do it tomorrow, right?
Yes.
She deals with the move.
She deals with the collection, the big collection of the printing collection.
She deals with the specialized collection.
She stays at Michelieu, she moves out here.
He is very interesting, very interesting for access informatics.
He is wonderful, yes.
He is interesting about general purpose, about numerization.
And with Frédéric Ramirez, you have a big view about the library.
That is... Yes, of course.
Now... I could give you... Maybe I could... When we'll speak more... If you want to have more precious things, I could quote things more...
You're fine.
But I am not good today because... What is numerization?
What does that mean?
Digitalization.
So that's digitalization.
Yes.
Computer services.
Actually, I should say something to you, but it's very delicate.
Thank you.